DOCSP-41988: Aggregation (#115)
mongodb/docs-php-library: source/aggregation.txt

return computed results. The MongoDB Aggregation framework, which is
part of the Query API, is modeled on the concept of data processing
pipelines. Documents enter a pipeline that contains one or more stages,
and this pipeline transforms the documents into an aggregated result.

An aggregation operation is similar to a car factory. A car factory has
an assembly line, which contains assembly stations with specialized
tools to do specific jobs, like drills and welders. Raw parts enter the
factory, and then the assembly line transforms and assembles them into a
finished product.

The **aggregation pipeline** is the assembly line, **aggregation stages** are the
assembly stations, and **operator expressions** are the
specialized tools.

Aggregation Versus Find Operations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You can use find operations to perform the following actions:

- Select which documents to return
- Select which fields to return
- Sort the results

You can use aggregation operations to perform the following actions:

- Run find operations
- Rename fields
- Calculate fields
- Summarize data
- Group values

Limitations
~~~~~~~~~~~

> Keep the following limitations in mind when using aggregation operations:

Reviewer: Nit:
```suggestion
Consider the following limitations when performing aggregation operations:
```

- Returned documents cannot violate the
  :manual:`BSON document size limit </reference/limits/#mongodb-limit-BSON-Document-Size>`
  of 16 megabytes.
- Pipeline stages have a memory limit of 100 megabytes by default. You can exceed this
  limit by creating an options array that sets the ``allowDiskUse`` option to ``true``
  and passing the array to the ``MongoDB\Collection::aggregate()`` method.

.. important:: $graphLookup Exception

   The :manual:`$graphLookup
   </reference/operator/aggregation/graphLookup/>` stage has a strict

>    memory limit of 100 megabytes and ignores the ``allowDiskUse`` option.

Reviewer: I think this admonition should be indented since it applies to the second bullet above

of New York. To do so, it uses an aggregation pipeline that contains the following stages:

- :manual:`$match </reference/operator/aggregation/match/>` stage to filter for documents
  in which the ``cuisine`` field contains the value ``'Bakery'``

- :manual:`$group </reference/operator/aggregation/group/>` stage to group the matching
  documents by the ``borough`` field, accumulating a count of documents for each distinct
  value

.. io-code-block::
   :copyable:

   .. input:: /includes/aggregation.php
      :start-after: start-match-group
      :end-before: end-match-group
      :language: php
      :dedent:

   .. output:: 
      :visible: false
      
      {"_id":"Brooklyn","count":173}
      {"_id":"Queens","count":204}
      {"_id":"Bronx","count":71}
      {"_id":"Staten Island","count":20}
      {"_id":"Missing","count":2}
      {"_id":"Manhattan","count":221}

Explain an Aggregation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To view information about how MongoDB executes your operation, you can
instruct the MongoDB query planner to **explain** it. When MongoDB explains
an operation, it returns **execution plans** and performance statistics.

> An execution plan is a potential way MongoDB can complete an operation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An execution plan is a potential way in which MongoDB can complete an operation.
```

When you instruct MongoDB to explain an operation, it returns both the
plan MongoDB executed and any rejected execution plans.

To explain an aggregation operation, run the ``explain`` database command by passing

> the command information to the ``MongoDB\Database::command()`` method. You must set the
> ``aggregate``, ``pipeline``, and ``cursor`` fields of the ``explain`` command document
> to explain the aggregation.

Reviewer: S: The word "set" here made me think you were going to explain what these fields needed to be set to
```suggestion
the command information to the ``MongoDB\Database::command()`` method. You must specify the
``aggregate``, ``pipeline``, and ``cursor`` fields in the ``explain`` command document
to explain the aggregation.
```

The following example instructs MongoDB to explain the aggregation operation from the
preceding :ref:`php-aggregation-example`:

.. io-code-block::
   :copyable:

   .. input:: /includes/aggregation.php
      :start-after: start-explain
      :end-before: end-explain
      :language: php
      :dedent:

   .. output:: 
      :visible: false

      {"explainVersion":"2","queryPlanner":{"namespace":"sample_restaurants.restaurants",
      "indexFilterSet":false,"parsedQuery":{"cuisine":{"$eq":"Bakery"}},"queryHash":"865F14C3",
      "planCacheKey":"D56D6F10","optimizedPipeline":true,"maxIndexedOrSolutionsReached":false,
      "maxIndexedAndSolutionsReached":false,"maxScansToExplodeReached":false,"winningPlan":{
      ... }

Additional Information
----------------------

MongoDB Server Manual

> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer: I think this would work better as a short sentence followed by a bulleted list for the sentences below. Something like:

To learn more about the topics discussed in this guide, see the following pages in the {+mdb-server+} manual:
- To view a full list of expression operators, see :manual:`Aggregation Operators </reference/operator/aggregation/>`
...
...
...

To view a full list of expression operators, see :manual:`Aggregation
Operators. </reference/operator/aggregation/>`

> To learn about assembling an aggregation pipeline and view examples, see

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To learn about assembling an aggregation pipeline and to view examples, see
```

   </getting-started>` guide.

To perform an aggregation, pass an array containing the aggregation pipeline
stages to the ``MongoDB\Collection::aggregate()`` method.

The following code example produces a count of the number of bakeries in each borough
of New York. To do so, it uses an aggregation pipeline that contains the following stages:

- :manual:`$match </reference/operator/aggregation/match/>` stage to filter for documents
  in which the ``cuisine`` field contains the value ``'Bakery'``

- :manual:`$group </reference/operator/aggregation/group/>` stage to group the matching
  documents by the ``borough`` field, accumulating a count of documents for each distinct
  value

.. io-code-block::
   :copyable:

   .. input:: /includes/aggregation.php
      :start-after: start-match-group
      :end-before: end-match-group
      :language: php
      :dedent:

   .. output:: 
      :visible: false

      {"_id":"Brooklyn","count":173}
      {"_id":"Queens","count":204}
      {"_id":"Bronx","count":71}
      {"_id":"Staten Island","count":20}
      {"_id":"Missing","count":2}
      {"_id":"Manhattan","count":221}

> Explain an Aggregation

Author: No specific reason, but I also see there's an explain option that you can pass to the aggregate() method - that probably makes the most sense for this code example. And it looks like the output only includes the query plan information, so I'll update the copy.

> Explain an Aggregation

Author: Actually will use `MongoDB\Collection::explain()`, based on your comment below

      "maxIndexedAndSolutionsReached":false,"maxScansToExplodeReached":false,"winningPlan":{
      ... }

Additional Information
----------------------

To view a tutorial that uses the {+php-library+} to create complex aggregation
pipelines, see `Complex Aggregation Pipelines with Vanilla PHP and MongoDB 
<https://www.mongodb.com/developer/products/mongodb/aggregations-php-mongodb/>`__
in the MongoDB Developer Center.

MongoDB Server Manual
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To learn more about the topics discussed in this guide, see the following
pages in the {+mdb-server+} manual:

- To view a full list of expression operators, see :manual:`Aggregation
  Operators </reference/operator/aggregation/>`.

- To learn about assembling an aggregation pipeline and to view examples, see
  :manual:`Aggregation Pipeline </core/aggregation-pipeline/>`.

- To learn more about creating pipeline stages, see :manual:`Aggregation
  Stages </reference/operator/aggregation-pipeline/>`.

- To learn more about explaining MongoDB operations, see
  :manual:`Explain Output </reference/explain-results/>` and
  :manual:`Query Plans </core/query-plans/>`.

> .. TODO:

Reviewer 2: Does the `php-aggregation-tutorials-landing` target exist already? I'm not sure how `.. TODO:` is interpreted here, and whether that prevents the subsequent content from rendering.

Author: Not yet, so this section is commented out (and will be uncommented when the aggregation tutorials are created)

 Aggregation Tutorials
 ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. To view step-by-step explanations of common aggregation tasks, see
.. :ref:`php-aggregation-tutorials-landing`.

API Documentation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> For more information about executing aggregation operations by using the {+php-library+},

Reviewer 2: Would "with the" read better than "by using the"? There's already an active verb with "executing".

Author: We have style guidelines about with / by using: https://www.mongodb.com/docs/meta/style-guide/terminology/alphabetical-terms/#std-term-using
